# E-commerce API Project Self-assessment

This was the first back-end portfolio project I executed. The objective was to build a fully functional RESTful API for an e-commerce application using Node.js, Express and PostgreSQL. It's curious because when I first sat down to plan the project, It did not seem too complicated. Sure it has many moving parts and details that require some thought upfront and can be complex, but I felt like the lessons I learned from the previous [Reddit Pocket](https://github.com/Pedro-Freddi/reddit-pocket) front-end project really made me more resilient to self-doubt and the feeling of being overwhelmed by the large number of tasks to get a project done. 

I approached this project very methodically and did not hesitate to plan and research as much as I could before writting any actual code. I think that, as a beginner, this is one of the greatest challenges because we might feel like we should get something running as quickly as possible and that we only learn by writing a lot of code. However planning is essential and taking the time to analyze the project's requirements through different perspectives (not only as a developer, but also as a customer, marketing or business analyst, etc.) is an opportunity to learn deeply. So I took a few days to write the project's plan, do a lot of research, design the database's schema and write the OpenAPI specification. Something that I'd like to remind myself in the future is that whenever I'm planning a project's implementation, I should aim to make a robust plan but also leave some space for flexibility and design decisions that might take place during development. It's impossible to plan every aspect of an application upfront and writing a plan that is too detailed probably won't meet the reality of the development process. During the actual implementation I got to see how the features really interact in the application and realized that the way I first planned to approach some tasks was flawed or too complex. So a flexible plan should be able to absorb these changes without too many side effects.

There isn't much to report on the implementation process itself. As I took my time to plan and do a lot of research before trying to code anything, when I actually got to the implementation I already had a pretty solid mental model of the application. Again I took my time to study deeply what I was implementing and I focused on analyzing each feature through different perspectives like modularity, code readability, security and resistance to failure. I was amazed to realize that an application could be abused in so many ways by end users, attackers or other applications. The criticality of back-end concerns is no easy task to handle as a developer and that stood out for me in comparison with the previous front-end project. I caught myself coding defensively and researching a lot on back-end security. It's a dense subject and something I'll definitely study further.

Completing this project was a milestone for me and it reinforced my passion for programming. In more than one situation where I was hunting a bug or trying to put some pieces together, it reminded me of when I was 11-12 years old and would spend an entire afternoon researching on how to install a mod for the game Counter-Strike Source or how to fix bugs that would pop here and there when I was trying to set up a server to play with my friends. Whenever I'm writing code or studying something I can feel that curious child seeing through my eyes, asking endless questions. No judgment, no fear, no trying to be something or someone, just pure curiosity and raw thirst for knowledge. May I be wise in my decisions to always keep this child alive.